

<!-- toc -->

- [IAM Identity and Access Managment](#iam--identity-and-access-managment)
  * [IAM Console](#iam-console)
  * [IAM policies inheritance](#iam-policies-inheritance)
  * [IAM Password policy](#iam-password-policy)
  * [IAM MFA](#iam-mfa)
  * [IAM Roles](#iam-roles)
  * [IAM Roles vs Users](#iam-roles-vs-users)
  * [AWS cli configure](#aws-cli-configure)
  * [AWS cloudshell](#aws-cloudshell)
  * [IAM Credentials Report](#iam-credentials-report)
  * [IAM Access Advisor](#iam-access-advisor)
  * [IAM best practices](#iam-best-practices)
    + [Shared responsibility model for IAM](#shared-responsibility-model-for-iam)
  * [Security Token Service (STS)](#security-token-service-sts)
  * [Cognito](#cognito)
  * [Directory Services](#directory-services)
  * [AWS IAM Identity Center](#aws-iam-identity-center)

<!-- tocstop -->

## IAM  Identity and Access Managment
that is aglobal service that is used to handle users and permissions. we have a root account created by default that should no be used or shared. Than we create **users** that are people within your organization and can be grouped.

We can create **groups** within IAM that can only contains users (not othes groups). a users can belong to multiple groups.

We create group for permission and allowing operations. users of groups can be assign JSON documents called policies: **JSON policies**.

We create the **least rivilege principale**, we do not give more permissions that a user need.

### IAM Console
1. users -> add user (IAM user) -> add user to group -> admin -> add tags (optional to keep more information to the resource).
2. create group -> admin -> administratoraccess.

we can create also the alias for the root ID that will be used to login while using IAM user. We can notice a difference between a root and a IAM user looking at the top right panel

### IAM policies inheritance
image that we have a policy assigned to a group, each people assigned to that group will have that policies. We can create also inline policies assigned to a single user.


Each user can have 2 policies:
1. Inline policies (directly attached to the user)
2. Managed policies (created separately and can be attached to multiple users like group policies)

policy example:

```json
{
	"Version": "2012-10-17",
	"Statement": [
		{
			"Sid": "VisualEditor0",  // identifier
			"Effect": "Allow",  // allow or deny
			"Action": [ // list of actions
				"iam:CreateUser",
				"iam:DeleteUser",
				"iam:ListUsers",
				"iam:GetUser",
				"iam:UpdateUser"
			],
			"Pricipal": "*", // who get the benefit of the strategy
			"Resource": "*"  // resource
		}
	]
}
```

### IAM Password policy
we can set the password policy for the users. We can set the password length, the password type, the password expiration and the password reuse prevention. We can different options:
- Require at least one uppercase letter
- Require at least one lowercase letter
- what ever you want

You acn allow all IAM users to change their own password by selecting the checkbox. and you can also force the user to change the password at the first login and change the
password every N days.

### IAM MFA
Users have access to your account and poosibly change configurations. You need to protect your root account and IAM users. You can do that by enabling MFA (Multi Factor Authentication). It is a security system that requires more than one method of authentication from independent categories of credentials to verify the user's identity for a login or other transaction.
MFA is using a combination of a password and a second factor. The second factor can be a Virtual MFA device (like google authenticator) or a U2F security key (like yubikey).

### IAM Roles
Some aws service will need to perform actions on your behalf, to do so will assign IAM roles. That are permission provided to AWS services.
The roles are used to delegate access to AWS resources to third parties. It is used to give access to AWS services to other AWS services.

It is used to give access to AWS services to your on-premise users. It is used to give access to AWS services to AWS services.

An example of usage of IAM roles is to give access to an EC2 instance to S3. We can create a role and attach a policy to it. Than we can attach the role to the EC2 instance. The EC2 instance will have access to S3.
To create a role the grammar is the following:

```json
{
	"Version": "2012-10-17",
	"Statement": [
		{
			"Sid": "VisualEditor0",
			"Effect": "Allow",
			"Action": "s3:*",
			"Resource": "*"
		}
	]
}
```

From the console we can go to roles and select the entity type. Some commons roles are:
- EC2 instance roles
- Lambda function roles
- Roles for CloudFormation

We create a policy, we create a rule name and we attach the policy to the role.

### IAM Roles vs Users
1. Roles are universal, you can use them in any region
2. Roles do not have any credentials (password or access key)
3. Roles are temporary (can be set to expire)
4. Roles can be assumed by users, services or even AWS services
5. IAM roles are free
6. You can attach policies to roles to control what the role can and cannot do

### AWS cli configure
First we need to create and Access Key ID and a Secret Access Key. We can do that by going to the IAM console and than to the users section.
From the console go to IAM, than to users, than to add user. We can choose the username and the access type. We can choose programmatic access and than we can attach a policy to the user. We can choose the policy that we have created before (EC2FullAccess).

we can configure the AWS cli by using the following command:

```bash
aws configure
```

than we can insert the access key and the secret access key. We can also set the default region and the default output format.


### AWS cloudshell

AWS CloudShell is a browser-based shell that provides direct command-line access to AWS resources from your web browser. It comes pre-authenticated with your console credentials and includes common command-line tools for managing AWS resources. 

Function: AWS CloudShell makes it easier to manage, explore, and interact with your AWS resources. It eliminates the need to install and configure CLI (Command Line Interface) tools on your local machine, as it comes pre-packaged with AWS CLI, AWS Elastic Beanstalk CLI, AWS SAM CLI, and more. 

Integration: AWS CloudShell integrates seamlessly with other AWS services. For instance, you can use it to manage your Amazon S3 buckets, deploy applications using AWS Elastic Beanstalk, or manage your AWS Lambda functions. 

Real-world use case: Suppose you're a developer who needs to quickly run scripts or commands against your AWS resources. Instead of setting up and maintaining a local CLI environment, you can simply open AWS CloudShell in your browser, write your commands, and execute them directly. This is particularly useful when you're working from different machines or locations, as your scripts and files are persisted across sessions for convenience. 

In summary, AWS CloudShell is a handy tool for developers and administrators who need a quick, easy, and consistent way to manage their AWS resources.

It is a linux shell with 1GB of persistent storage. It is free to use, you pay for the underlying resources.

###  IAM Credentials Report
The IAM Credentials Report is a document that lists all your account's users and the status of their various credentials, including passwords, access keys, MFA devices, and certificate-based authentication. 

This report integrates with IAM and helps you audit the use of AWS resources in your organization. 

A real-world use case for the IAM Credentials Report is in an organization that needs to comply with security standards or regulations. The organization can use the report to regularly review and improve their security practices, such as ensuring that all users have strong passwords and that unused access keys are deactivated.

### IAM Access Advisor
IAM Access Advisor is a tool that helps you view the AWS service permissions granted to a user, group, role, or policy and when those services were last accessed. 

Access Advisor integrates with IAM and other AWS services by analyzing the AWS CloudTrail logs to provide the access information. 

A real-world use case for IAM Access Advisor is in an organization that wants to implement the principle of least privilege, which means giving users only the permissions they need to do their job. The organization can use Access Advisor to review the services that a user has not accessed in a long time and then remove those unnecessary permissions.

### IAM best practices
- Don't use the root account except for AWS account setup
- One physical user = one AWS user
- Assign users to groups and assign permissions to groups
- Create a strong password policy
- Use and enforce the use of MFA
- Create and use roles for giving permissions to AWS services
- Use access keys for programmatic access (CLI/SDK)
- Audit permissions of your account with the IAM credentials report
- Never share IAM users and access keys

#### Shared responsibility model for IAM
AWS is responsible for:
- The IAM service itself
- Managing the physical security of the underlying infrastructure.
- Compliance validation

You are responsible for:
- Users, groups, roles, policies
- enabling MFA to the users
- Rotate credentials regularly
- Monitor activity in your account review logs and use IAM credentials report.



### Security Token Service (STS) 

Amazon Security Token Service (STS) is a web service that enables you to request temporary, limited-privilege credentials for AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) users or for users that you authenticate (federated users). This service is primarily used to delegate access to your AWS resources.

STS integrates with other AWS services by providing temporary security credentials that applications can use to sign requests to access AWS resources. For example, you might provide an application running on an EC2 instance with temporary security credentials to access an S3 bucket.

A real-world use case for STS is in a multi-tenant SaaS application where each tenant requires access to a unique set of resources. With STS, you can generate unique, temporary credentials for each tenant, limiting their access to only their resources.

### Cognito 

Amazon Cognito provides authentication, authorization, and user management for your web and mobile apps. Your users can sign in directly with a user name and password, or through a third party such as Facebook, Amazon, or Google.

Cognito integrates with other AWS services by providing tokens that your application can use to access other AWS services. For example, after a user is authenticated, Cognito returns user pool tokens to your app. You can use these tokens to grant your users access to other AWS services.

A real-world use case for Cognito is a mobile app that requires user sign-in. With Cognito, you can easily manage user sign-up, sign-in, and access control, and you can integrate with social identity providers.

### Directory Services 

AWS Directory Service is a managed service that allows you to connect your AWS resources with an existing on-premises Microsoft Active Directory or to set up a new, standalone directory in the AWS Cloud. It's used to centralize the management of users, groups, and computers.

Directory Services integrates with other AWS services by providing a way for your resources to use standard LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) calls to access the directory. For example, you can use Directory Services to manage access to EC2 instances or to authenticate to RDS databases.

A real-world use case for Directory Services is a company that wants to migrate its on-premises applications to the AWS Cloud but still needs to use its existing Active Directory for user authentication.

### AWS IAM Identity Center

AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) enables you to manage access to AWS services and resources securely. With IAM, you can create and manage AWS users and groups, and use permissions to allow and deny their access to AWS resources.

IAM integrates with almost all other AWS services by providing the authentication and authorization layer for those services. For example, you can use IAM to define who has access to your S3 buckets or who can launch EC2 instances.

A real-world use case for IAM is a company that wants to control access to its AWS resources. With IAM, the company can create users for each employee, groups for each department, and define what resources each user or group can access.
