

<!-- toc -->

- [Deploy React app](#deploy-react-app)
  * [Webpack](#webpack)
    + [What is Webpack?](#what-is-webpack)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Deploy React app
Create a production build of your React app: Before deploying your React app, you need to create a production build. This will optimize your app for performance and remove any unnecessary code that you may have added during development. To create a production build, run the following command in your terminal:


```sh
npm run build
```

This will create a build folder in your project directory, which contains all the necessary files for your production build.

Install serve package: serve is a lightweight HTTP server that can serve your static build files. You can install it by running the following command:
```sh
npm install -g serve
```
This will install serve globally on your system.

Serve your build folder: To serve your production build folder, navigate to your project directory in the terminal and run the following command:
```sh
serve -s build
```
This will start the serve server and serve your build folder. You should see output similar to the following:


```sh
Serving!
- Local:            http://localhost:5000
- On Your Network:  http://192.168.1.100:5000
```

You can now access your React app by navigating to the URL provided by serve.

Deploy to hosting provider: To deploy your app to a hosting provider, you can simply upload the contents of your build folder to the hosting provider's file manager or use a tool like rsync to synchronize your local build folder with the hosting provider. Some popular hosting providers for static sites include Netlify, Firebase, AWS S3, and GitHub Pages.

If you're deploying to Netlify, you can simply drag and drop the contents of your build folder to the Netlify deploy area in your project dashboard.

If you're deploying to AWS S3, you can use the AWS CLI to synchronize your local build folder with an S3 bucket. Here's an example command:

```bash
aws s3 sync build/ s3://your-bucket-name --acl public-read
```
This will upload the contents of your build folder to the specified S3 bucket and set the ACL to public read.

Test your app: Once your app has been deployed, make sure to test it thoroughly to ensure that everything is working as expected. If you run into any issues, check the console for error messages and consult the documentation for your hosting provider.

### Webpack

Webpack is not part of React itself, but it is a widely used tool for bundling and managing the assets of a web application, including JavaScript files, CSS files, and images. React can be used with or without Webpack, but it is a common practice to use Webpack with React to take advantage of its powerful features.

By default, React uses its own module bundler called "create-react-app" which hides most of the webpack configurations and setup under the hood. This makes it easy for developers to get started with React without worrying about the complexities of configuring and managing Webpack. However, if you need more control over your build process, you can eject from create-react-app and customize your Webpack configuration.

Additionally, many React projects use additional libraries and frameworks that require a more complex build process. In these cases, developers may choose to use Webpack directly to configure their build process. Webpack can be configured to optimize the performance of the application, such as minimizing the size of JavaScript and CSS files, and tree-shaking, which removes unused code from the final bundle.

In summary, while React comes with a basic built-in bundling system, Webpack is a more flexible and customizable tool that can be used to optimize the performance and configuration of a React application.

#### What is Webpack?
Webpack is a popular module bundler that is often used in conjunction with React to package and optimize web applications. In simple terms, it takes all of your project's modules and dependencies, and combines them into a single, minified file that can be deployed to a web server.

When using Webpack with React, it is typically used to bundle all of your React components, along with any required assets such as images and stylesheets, into a single JavaScript file that can be included in your HTML document.

To use Webpack with React, you'll need to install it as a dependency in your project using npm or yarn. Once you have it installed, you can create a configuration file that tells Webpack how to bundle your application.

Here's an example webpack.config.js file for a basic React application:

```js

const path = require('path');

module.exports = {
  entry: './src/index.js',
  output: {
    path: path.resolve(__dirname, 'dist'),
    filename: 'bundle.js',
  },
  module: {
    rules: [
      {
        test: /\.(js|jsx)$/,
        exclude: /node_modules/,
        use: {
          loader: 'babel-loader',
        },
      },
      {
        test: /\.css$/,
        use: ['style-loader', 'css-loader'],
      },
      {
        test: /\.(png|svg|jpg|gif)$/,
        use: ['file-loader'],
      },
    ],
  },
  resolve: {
    extensions: ['*', '.js', '.jsx'],
  },
};
```

Let's break down what's happening here:

* The entry property specifies the starting point of our application, which in this case is the index.js file located in the src directory.
* The output property specifies the output directory and file name for our bundled JavaScript file.
* The module property defines how Webpack should handle various types of files in our application. In this example, we have three rules:
  *   The first rule handles JavaScript and JSX files using the babel-loader, which transpiles the code to make it compatible with older browsers.
  *   The second rule handles CSS files using the style-loader and css-loader, which allow us to import and use CSS in our JavaScript files.
  *   The third rule handles image files using the file-loader, which copies the image files to our output directory and returns the URL for the copied file.
* The resolve property specifies which file extensions Webpack should try to resolve when importing modules.

Once you have your webpack.config.js file set up, you can use the webpack command to build your application:


```
$ webpack
```

This will generate a bundled JavaScript file in the dist directory, which you can then include in your HTML file like so:

```html

<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <title>My React App</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="root"></div>
    <script src="dist/bundle.js"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```
This is a basic example of how to use Webpack with React, but there are many other configuration options and plugins available that can help you optimize and customize your build process.

