

<!-- toc -->

- [SQL Declarative Language](#sql-declarative-language)
  * [Data Definition Language (DDL)](#data-definition-language-ddl)
  * [Data Manipulation Language (DML)](#data-manipulation-language-dml)
  * [Data Control Language (DCL)](#data-control-language-dcl)
  * [Transaction Control Commands (TCL)](#transaction-control-commands-tcl)

<!-- tocstop -->

## SQL Declarative Language

SQL is a declarative language. You tell the database what you want to do, and it figures out how to perform the task. You don't have to list out step-by-step instructions for how to do something like you would in a procedural language like C or Java.

There is an **optimizer** that figures out the best way to execute your query. This is a good thing, because it means that the database will automatically take advantage of faster algorithms that you might not have known about or thought to use.

The main components of SQL syntax are:
- Data Definition Language (DDL)
- Data Manipulation Language (DML)
- Data Control Language (DCL)
- Transaction Control Commands (TCL)

### Data Definition Language (DDL)


Data Definition Language, commonly known as DDL, is a subset of SQL (Structured Query Language). SQL is a language used for managing and manipulating relational databases. DDL specifically deals with the structure or schema of the database. It provides commands for creating, altering, and deleting database objects such as tables, indices, and users.

The main purpose of DDL is to define and manage all the objects in an SQL database. It solves the problem of creating and modifying the structure of database objects without having to manually write extensive code. DDL commands are powerful and can change the entire structure of a database, so they must be used with caution.

1. **`CREATE`** - to create objects in the database
```sql
CREATE TABLE my_table (
    column_one INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    column_two VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL,
    column_three TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);
```

2. **`ALTER`** - The ALTER command is used to modify an existing database object, like a table. It can be used to add, delete/drop or modify columns in a table. It can also be used to add and drop constraints on a table. 
```sql
ALTER TABLE my_table
ADD COLUMN column_four INTEGER NOT NULL;
```

3. **`DROP`** - delete objects from the database, we remove entire tables from the database
```sql
DROP TABLE my_table;
```

4. **`TRUNCATE`** - remove all records from a table, including all spaces allocated for the records are removed but the table structure and column datatypes remain
```sql
TRUNCATE TABLE my_table;
```

5. **`RENAME`** - rename an object
```sql
RENAMETABLE my_table TO my_new_table;
```

### Data Manipulation Language (DML)

Data Manipulation Language (DML) is a subset of SQL (Structured Query Language), which is used for managing and manipulating data in a relational database. The main purpose of DML is to provide a flexible and efficient way to insert, update, delete, and retrieve data from a database. It solves the problem of data management in software development by providing a standardized language that can be used across different database systems.

DML is an essential tool for any software developer working with databases, as it allows them to interact with the data in a structured and efficient manner. It is also a crucial component of many web and software applications, as it enables the manipulation of data stored in a backend database.

1. **`SELECT`** - retrieve data from a database
```sql
SELECT * FROM my_table;
```

2. **`INSERT`** - insert data into a table
```sql
INSERT INTO my_table (column_one, column_two, column_three)
VALUES (1, 'A row', '2021-01-01 00:00:00');
```

or insert multiple rows
```sql
INSERT INTO my_table (column_one, column_two, column_three)
VALUES (2, 'Another row', '2021-01-01 00:00:00'),
       (3, 'Yet another row', '2021-01-01 00:00:00');
```

3. **`UPDATE`** - update existing data in a table
```sql
UPDATE my_table
SET column_two = 'Updated row'
WHERE column_one = 1;
```

4. **`DELETE`** - delete data from a table
```sql
DELETE FROM my_table
WHERE column_one = 1;
```

### Data Control Language (DCL)

Data Control Language (DCL) is a subset of SQL (Structured Query Language) that includes commands related to access control for the database objects. It is used to control the permissions and access levels of users in a database environment. The main purpose of DCL is to provide a mechanism for securing the data stored in a database. It solves the problem of unauthorized data access, manipulation, and deletion by defining and managing the rights that users have on the database objects.

1. **`GRANT`** - give users permission to access database objects, the user can be a specific user or a group of users in the form of a role.
```sql
GRANT SELECT ON my_table TO `user`@`localhost`;
```

2. **`REVOKE`** - remove users' permission to access database objects
```sql
REVOKE SELECT ON my_table FROM my_user;
```

We can create users and roles with the `CREATE USER` and `CREATE ROLE` commands. We can also delete users and roles with the `DROP USER` and `DROP ROLE` commands.
for example:
```sql
CREATE USER my_user IDENTIFIED BY 'my_password';
```

then we can grant permissions to the user
```sql
GRANT SELECT ON my_table TO my_user;
```

and finally we can revoke permissions from the user
```sql
REVOKE SELECT ON my_table FROM my_user;
```

if we want to grant all permissions to the user we can use the `ALL PRIVILEGES` keyword

```sql
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON my_table TO my_user;
```

### Transaction Control Commands (TCL)

One of the key features of SQL is its Transaction Control Commands. These commands are used to manage transactions in the database. A transaction is a single logical unit of work that accesses and possibly modifies the contents of a database. Transactions ensure the database remains in a consistent state even in cases of system failure or concurrent access.

The main purpose of Transaction Control Commands is to provide a mechanism to group one or more SQL statements into a single atomic unit of work, so that all the changes made in the database by a transaction are made permanent or undone altogether. This ensures data integrity and consistency in the database.

1. **`COMMIT`** - The COMMIT command is used to permanently save any transaction into the database. When a COMMIT command is executed, the current transaction ends and makes permanent all changes performed in the transaction.
```sql
INSERT INTO my_table (column_one, column_two, column_three)
VALUES (1, 'A row', '2021-01-01 00:00:00');

COMMIT;
```

2. **`ROLLBACK`** - The ROLLBACK command is used to undo transactions that have not already been saved to the database. The command also ends the current transaction and discards any changes made during the transaction.
```sql
INSERT INTO my_table (column_one, column_two, column_three)
VALUES (1, 'A row', '2021-01-01 00:00:00');

ROLLBACK;
```
